good afternoon and welcome to the
Downing Street
coronavirus daily briefing I'm joined
today by Professor Jonathan van tam the
deputy chief medical officer and by John
Newton our coordinator for testing today
I want to update you with the latest
plans for our programme of test track
and trace how we're going to use this
massive testing capability that we've
built in order to get our down and keep
our down before I do that I just want to
remind you of what we're trying to
achieve our plan is to slow the spread
and to protect the NHS so that the NHS
is always there for you and your family
whenever you need it
whether for coronavirus or anything else
that goal is working the number of spare
critical care beds in the NHS is 3413 on
the latest figures there have been 1
million 291,000 tests for coronavirus
including 85,000 186 tests on Sunday
yesterday a hundred and ninety thousand
584 people have now tested positive for
coronavirus an increase of three
thousand nine hundred and eighty-five
thirteen thousand two hundred and fifty
eight people are in hospital with
coronavirus and twenty eight thousand
seven hundred and thirty-four people
have died that's across all settings an
increase of 288 that figure is lower
than at any point since the end of March
but as with testing these reported
figures tend to be lower over the
weekend so we do do expect that number
to rise and remember this is not just a
number but it is a constant insistent
reminder that we must go further and
faster in our national effort in dealing
with this virus
over the last month we've built a
national testing infrastructure capable
of over a hundred thousand tests a day
today the capacity stands at a hundred
and eight thousand this means we're now
in a position to start implementing the
next part of our plan track and trace
the aim of test track and trace is to
hunt down and isolate the virus so it's
unable to reproduce and crucially test
track and trace allows us to take a more
targeted approach to lock down while
still safely containing the disease
creating this system is a huge national
undertaking of unprecedented scale and
complexity we've already taken Britain's
small but brilliant Diagnostics industry
and taken it to global scale we're
building an army of human contact
tracers who command the phones and find
the contacts and support people and of
course we're developing the contact
tracing app which can help us deliver
test track and trace on the mass scale
that we need across the country the app
which takes full consideration of
privacy and security has already been
tested in closed conditions at an RAF
base and today I can announce the next
steps from tomorrow we will begin to
pilot test track and trace on the Isle
of Wight starting with health
professionals and rolling out this week
to all citizens I'm grateful to the huge
enthusiasm shown by Islanders who who
know that by participating in this pilot
they're at the forefront of helping get
Britain back on her feet where the Isle
of Wight goes Britain follows the island
has a single NHS trust one local
authority with the responsibilities for
Public Health a relatively low number of
Kovac cases and because it's an island
we can run this trial in proper
scientifically controlled conditions
comparing the effect with the effect and
with what's going on on the mainland
before we roll it out to the rest
the country so here's how it'll work
last week we put in place the testing
capability on the island from tonight
the contact tracing capability will go
live and then tomorrow NHS staff on the
island will be able to download the app
and from Thursday each one of the 80,000
households on the island will get a
letter from the chief nurse with
comprehensive information about the
trial Islanders will then be asked to
install the app once you've installed
the app it'll start logging the distance
between your phone and other phones with
an app nearby it's been designed with a
form of Bluetooth that conserves power
so the app won't drain your battery and
this log of proximity information will
then be securely stored on your phone if
you become unwell with kovat symptoms
you inform the NHS via the app other app
users who you've had significant contact
with in the last few days will then be
sent an alert by the NHS along with
advice about what to do a test ordering
function will then be built-in if you're
watching this and you live on the Isle
of Wight I have a simple message please
download the app to protect the NHS and
save lives
by downloading the app you're protecting
your own health you're protecting the
health of your loved ones and the health
of your community I know the people of
the Isle of Wight will embrace this with
enthusiasm because by embarking on this
project and by embracing test track and
trace you will be saving lives the pilot
is important so we can help make sure
the app works as well as it possibly can
alongside the contact tracing system and
with your help we'll learn a lot we'll
use it to make things better and we want
to hear from you I want to stress and
this is really important that this trial
does not mean the end of social
distancing on the Isle of Wight or
where else for that matter we will only
change the social distancing rules once
our five tests are met so I'll end with
the instruction that we all know please
stay at home protect the NHS and save
lives or if you live on the Isle of
Wight stay at home install the app
protect the NHS and save lives I'll now
turn to Professor van tan to take us
through the days chance John Thank You
secretary stage so let's begin again
with refreshing the five tests that we
have in place for deciding if we're
going to adjust the lockdown the first
is around NHS capacity and we're in a
good position on that one the second one
is about a sustained and consistent fall
in daily deaths from coronavirus and it
is now very clear in the data that we
are past the peak the next one is solid
information that the rate of infection
is decreasing to manageable levels right
across the board this is an indicator
that we need to keep a close eye on over
the next few days and weeks the fourth
one is around operational challenges
around testing and PPE and being able to
meet future demand there are continuing
challenges on PPE it is an absolute
priority to continue pushing on this to
get it right in the long run but of
course in on testing as you've heard
from the Secretary of State we're in a
very good position and finally we have
to be confident that the adjustments we
contemplate are not going to risk a
second peak of infections and this is
really a matter of deep scientific
discussion very very close following an
absorbing of the evidence
one that we're keeping under detailed
scientific review as the days and weeks
go by next slide please
now this slide actually shows search
data of people looking at Apple maps for
directions over driving over walking
routes or over using public transport
and it tells the same story as slides
you have seen before about how since we
announced these social distancing
measures the public continue to observe
the instructions to work with us to work
to protect the NHS and get case numbers
down and you can see very very
consistent trends over reduced searches
for driving instructions walking
instructions and use of public transport
so we need to keep going let's keep
going and continue to drop the curve
further next slide please
these are this is a graph showing from
the 6th of April through to the 4th of
May daily tests completed for
coronavirus and you can see on the right
hand side the latest data showing 85,000
tests completed on the 4th of May our
capacity is 108 thousand tests and there
is another lab opening next week
so this is all very encouraging tests
are going up people are using testing
services more and we are well within our
capacity capability next slide please
now this slide shows new cases of
coronavirus in the UK from the 21st of
March you can see that obvious peak up
to a high level in early April and then
you can see the pattern that has
occurred
in terms of new cases right up until the
fourth of May on this one I have to say
that new cases need to come down further
we have to continue to track this index
and we have to get cases lower if you
look to the next slide please
here we array the number of people in
hospital with kovat 19 from 17th of
March through to the 3rd of May and
after Peaks in the middle of April you
can see that in almost all areas now
there are steady but absolutely
consistent declines occurring possibly
in a small number of areas the trend is
somewhat flat but overall there are now
steady declines in the number of people
in hospital this is good news
following on please the next slide
critical care beds ICU beds here again
across all four nations you can see
largely continuing declines and possibly
a more important point if you look at
the axis on the left of the slide the
y-axis you can see where we are in terms
of capacity and there is plenty of ICU
capacity which is extremely good I turn
now to deaths in all settings and here
you can see that there is a slow but
consistent decline you will see the
weekend effect very clearly especially
if you look at the three steps on the
right-hand side of the chart fewer
deaths are actually recorded reported at
the weekends that's an artifact of the
way people report deaths but overall if
you look at the orange line the
seven-day and smoothed out rolling
average there is this slow but
consistent decline which is absolutely
going in the right direction now and
then the final slide is one we have
shown for some time showing a comparison
across countries
dating back to the day when fifty-fifty
cumulative deaths were recorded in each
of the countries and we're now quite
away across the slide 260 old days in
some of the countries the message is the
same as I've said to you before that
there are kind of three broad trends on
this curve but I do want to emphasize to
you these are numbers they are not rates
they do not adjust for the size of the
underlying population and this is a
difficulty in interpreting these data we
will in the course of time be able to
get all caused age-adjusted excess
mortality for many of the countries on
this slide and that will give us a much
clearer understanding of what is going
on and hopefully those data will
continue for a long period of time so
that we can understand the fullness of
the picture as we try to beat this virus
I will stop there with the data and hand
back to the secretary of state thank you
very much Jonathan and we're now going
to take questions and the first question
from a member of the public we have a
video from sac Lane from London what is
being done to ensure that be am key
workers are not disproportionately
affected by Co vid 19 and what steps are
being taken to provide support to the
families of those victims who are sadly
passed away Thank You Sakhalin an
incredibly important question to
impending incredibly important questions
both of which we're working hard to
address and I'm going to ask Jonathan to
set out the details but what I'd say
absolutely from the start is that we
recognize that there has been a
disproportionately high number of people
from black and ethnic minority
backgrounds who have passed away
especially amongst the care workers and
those in the NHS
and I I pay tribute to them before and I
will do so again because the NHS is an
amazing organization that has been built
on the dedication of people from all
backgrounds and this including many many
who've come to this country to to give
their lives working in the NHS and
disproportionately employs people from
ethnic minority backgrounds and yet we
have seen this impact in the data and I
think it's affected a lot of us working
on it to see the hat and so we've got a
lot of work going in to fully understand
scientifically and make sure that in
every single case we learn what we can
to protect people better in terms of
support for the families of those who've
passed away for those working in the NHS
we have a we now have a program of
support that we've been able to put in
place that is there for everybody who
has a is from a family where where
somebody has died while since ervice and
including across pharmacy across social
can that's so that I think that's a
really important thing for us to do to
recognize the the sacrifice of those put
themselves at risk by going to work in
this in what can be dangerous conditions
where they might be working with those
who have covered 19 Jonathan yes I'm
extremely sorry whenever I hear of a
health care worker death due to
coronavirus whether it's someone from a
black and minority ethnic group or
otherwise it doesn't change the fact
that it takes courage to work in the NHS
at a time like this and it's most
difficult on the subject of the signal
that we have so far on black and
minority ethnic groups I want to say to
you that we are taking it incredibly
seriously
there is a very big piece of scientific
work now ongoing that will report to the
chief medical officer and we'll get to
the bottom of this however long it takes
us but I will also say that this is a
complicated picture because when you
start to study patterns of disease
across different ethnic groups you also
have to take into account potential
differences in the age structure between
groups also differences in the patterns
of underlying medical conditions which
we know do vary by ethnic group and
therefore it's a complicated picture and
also deprivation has to be taken into
account where people live and all of
this is complex it takes time and I'm
not going to rush that answer I think we
owe it to minority ethnic groups to get
this right and get a clear signal for
you and you'll have worked out I'm from
an ethnic minority group and we will get
to the bottom of this it could be that
Professor Newton has some further
epidemiological granularity he'd like to
add on this point
thank you John well just to say that we
are as you say looking at the data very
carefully not just on ethnicity but also
on age sex and other factors such as
obesity which we know do have an impact
on the effect of coronavirus and but
it's already clear from some of the
published data that the impacted in BME
groups is greater that there are more
people with the infection and those who
have the infection have have worse
outcomes in many cases so there is
already cause for concern but as johnson
says we're not entirely entirely clear
how much of that is due to different
levels of underlying conditions or other
risk factors so there is work to be done
and we will be publishing this as soon
as it's ready thank you very much thank
you psych lane the next questions from
Conrad from Ashford and Conrad asks
going forward will the primary aim of
test track and trace be to squash the
occurrence of covered 19 infection to
very low levels or simply to flatten the
curve
enough that the NHS is not overwhelmed
and that is a really important question
Conrad the answer is that test track and
trace will help us to get the r down and
to get the number of new cases down and
to keep it down but not on its own it's
primarily the social distancing measures
that we've taken so far that have
flattened the curve and now the we can
see that the curve is going down from
the presentation that Professor van Town
just gave the goal is to keep the number
of new infections going down and bring
in the test track and trace but at a
point which we will do well tomorrow
from tomorrow in the Isle of Wight and
then rolling out to the rest of the
country will will that we will get those
numbers down the test tracking trace
becomes more effective the lower the
number and then we want to keep the
number going down by keeping the are
below 1 the rate of infection so it is
not our goal is not simply to flatten
the curve it is to get the occurrence of
covered 19 infections to very low levels
to be absolutely clear within your
question that that is the answer thanks
very much and we'll now take questions
from the media you pin from the BBC
thank you very much when will you have
recruited your 18,000 contact tracers
and when will the full test track and
trace network be up and running the aim
is to have the whole thing up and
running in the by the middle of this
month we're starting already we've
already started the recruitment we have
of the 18,000 we have thousands already
recruited and we are making very rapid
progress not only in the recruitment but
also the the training that's necessary a
short piece of training and we have
enough to get going on the Isle of Wight
in fact they came on stream as of 5
o'clock this evening so there that's
I'm running now and then to roll out
across the country but there's no
there's no magic around the 18,000
figure that is the initial scale that we
think is necessary if it needs to be
bigger when we find out from the ONS
survey that's in the field at the moment
what the prevalence of the disease is
the number of new cases per day actually
out there rather than that that we find
through positive tests then we will then
we'll adjust that figure that's the
initial goal but it'll be up and running
by the middle of the month can I ask one
more of course on business some
businesses will be required to have PPE
for their staff where will they procure
it and will they be in competition with
the NHS well this is a really important
question when we consider changes to the
social distancing measures the wider
impact of changes to social distancing
measures including for instance on PPE
and the first call on PPE must go to the
NHS and social care and those other
essential services who need it to keep
the people delivering those services
safe and so that is something that we
take into account it's in our five tests
but it is something that we're working
very hard on now of course it's our job
in running the health and social care
system to ensure that those areas and
the other public services have PPE but
and there's a worldwide shortage and as
you say so we do need to take that into
consideration before making before
making changes and that's why it's one
of the five tests thanks very much
Tom Clark from ITV Thank You Secretary
of State's and the most successful
contact tracing efforts around the world
like those of you now South Korea
Singapore were only partly reliant on
mobile phone technology in order to work
they were more reliant on large numbers
of volunteers
level going out to track down and trace
cases at huge scale has the government
insured this capacity is in place in the
UK or are we putting too much faith in
call centers and in untested digital
technologies maybe it's a really
important point and I agree with the
with the point in the question which is
that it isn't just about the technology
and the people in call centers it's also
about citizens acting in the right way
acting in the right way to download the
app because that protects you and
protects your family and protects the
NHS but also acting in the right way to
do contact tracing yourself John really
good it's a really good point well made
the app is very exciting and the app
adds something extra it adds some an
automated response that can be almost
immediate but as you say the program
that we're putting in place is an
integrated program with the app but also
with contact tracing driven by testing
so access to testing partly through the
app but also other routes to a test and
then the test result backed up by
contact tracing driven by public health
professionals at one level we've got
public health England but also a lot of
experience on the ground with directors
of public health and local authorities
environmental health officers who are
very expert in this exactly as you say
shoe-leather epidemiology out on the
streets
finding contacts and but even actually
what people call traditional contact
tracing isn't very traditional anymore
it's quite also it's quite highly
technical so we've developed a web-based
support the contact tracing an advisory
service which has been ramped up to
support this and there's also another
line of defense through the telephone
call centre so it's a multi-layered
approach and one of the points of the
Isle of Wight test pilot is to try and
see how those different elements
integrate together to support each other
so it's a very good point we are
learning from the best practice around
the world but we also have something to
offer in the UK as well because we've
been doing this for a long time thanks
Tom I hope that answers your question
yes I may have a quick follow up
question are we are we caught in
something of a catch-22 with contact
tracing that as I understand
the numbers of cases have to fall quite
a bit more before we can reliably roll
it out across the country but if we keep
lockdown as an approach which we have to
until your fifth test is met it's quite
hard to pilot contact tracing because
most of us are trying to isolate
ourselves as much as possible so no is
the short answer
the and a lot of slightly longer answer
is that even with social motor social
distancing measures there still are some
new cases and the and that means that
the that the technology can still be
effective and even with the scale of of
of new cases across the country contact
tracing can still have an impact and the
app will still be highly effective it's
just more effective the fewer the number
of new cases so these are all matters of
degree rather than absolute so we're not
caught in a in a in a catch-22 but it is
absolutely true that the social
distancing measures are the other thing
that is doing they're having the big
impact and so the hence the you know the
message remains stay at home to protect
the NHS and save lives unless you're in
the Isle of Wight but in your even in
the Isle of Wight you should still stay
at home to protect the NHS and save
lives it's that you should also install
the app because that will help it this
to be yet more effective one final point
on this which is the Isle of Wight has a
slightly lower rate of covert new covert
infections than some other places in the
country and therefore actually is a that
makes it a good place to test this not
only is it good because it will help the
Isle of Wight but it is also good
because it has that slightly lower
number of new infections lockdown
measures until contact tracing is up and
running across the country no the two
aren't aren't necessarily linked like
that we haven't
said that you we can't make changes
before it's up and running it's just
that the test track and trace system
will help us to get our down and hold
our down and the lower the number of new
cases the more effective it will be but
we haven't made a concrete link that
your question drew between the number
between the having this system of in
place nationally and making changes to
the social distancing measures we there
isn't a necessary link between the two
they're just they they do work in tandem
the next question is from Oliver Dyer
from Isle of Wight radio even in all in
a poll that Isle of Wight radio ran
today 80% of our listeners said they
would install this new app but the
island has a higher than average elderly
population who fall into the governments
of vulnerable category
how are you expecting those who don't
have a smartphone or can't use that
technology be it on the island or across
the country to get behind this and with
that in mind considering the islands has
an elderly population one of the
questions our listeners want to know is
why the islands been chosen over other
over as a UK islands or locations so
look that's a great set of questions
Oliver and I'm really really pleased to
hear that 80 percent of people said that
they would download the app and because
the more people who download the app the
more effective it's going to be because
it's a you need you need two people
having downloaded the app for it to be
effective for one to be able to tell the
other that they've been in close contact
with somebody who's got symptoms of
covered 19 and so I'm really pleased
that the people of the Isle of Wight
have responded today in this way I had a
feeling that they would and I'm really
glad that they have and but partly
because of the challenges that you set
out that not everybody has a motor
smartphone that that's that's another
reason actually to test it in the Isle
of Wight because if we tested it
somewhere where it would be easy we
wouldn't find as many of the the
challenges rather than testing it
somewhere where you've got to do the
got to have the technology but you've
got to have the human contact tracing as
well they go they go hand in hand they
help each other and so that's that is
actually one of the things we thought
about before choosing the Isle of Wight
as the as the place to go first
John do you yeah thank you I mean I
think the other white is an ideal place
to do this
it's quite a large population and there
is a benefit in the fact that travel on
and off the island is relatively
restricted the ferries are there but
they're running relatively infrequently
so it is an ideal place to look at the
epidemiology and see the impact it's
also I used to be the Regional Director
of Public Health for South Central
including the Isle of Wight I know that
the island the island is is very well
equipped to respond to things that is
it's a very coherent group we've had
tremendous support from the local
authority from the NHS from the local MP
and like everybody else I think it's
going to be a great success as a as a
pilot and your point about elderly
people I think we shouldn't first you
shouldn't make assumptions and then
quite a lot of elderly people are
extremely tech savvy and quite happy to
use smart phones but we've also
recognized that there are other ways of
doing contact tracing so as I mentioned
we've built in a number of routes so
people don't have to have the app in
order to benefit but of course we will
all benefit if the app and the contact
tracing drives down the infection rate
it drives down the infection rate for
everybody and I think the third point to
say is that the people who are most
mobile and most likely to be out bumping
into each other are also the people who
are probably most likely to be using
smartphones so I think all in all we
think it's a strong program and we're
looking forward to see how it works in
your Isle of Wight and that that survey
is extremely encouraging so thank you
does that answer your question it does
yeah I'm gonna add one more follow-up go
ahead fantastic so obviously whilst a
lot of people will love our radio
listeners in particular I have been
positive about the app there are some
concerns that the lockdown measures
could be lifted here early to form part
of that trial could lock down on the
eyelid weight being lifted earlier than
the rest of the UK and if so is it safe
to do so well I want to thank I love
white radio listeners for how much
they've engaged with this this this idea
today and
I can reassure you that there aren't any
changes to social distancing measures
that are proposed as part of this pilot
the pilot is to find out how the app
works how the interaction of people then
becomes recognized by the technology and
the the link from that to the human
contact tracing and to the testing
regime because there's a new testing
center on the Isle of Wight as well so
there aren't changes our proposals are
that changes to be to the social
distancing will only take place when the
five tests are met and that's nationally
rather than the Isle of Wight having
having any differences in that part to
the rest of the country thanks very much
indeed Oliver Joe Murphy from the
Evening Standard good afternoon
can I ask the scientists how has your
understanding of immunity developed over
the last month or so do you know yet
whether people will catch it again and
how are the tests
developing how how the testing of the
tests going do you see antibodies and
immunity playing a really significant
role in easing out of lockdown or not
and section of state if I could just ask
a follow to Conrad's question and who
asked how low the numbers we go you said
very low can you put a figure on that
the answer to the second question is no
and the answers the first question is
and I'll say a little and then I'll ask
both scientists to come in John on the
testing and jvt
on the science of immunity what it says
that antibody testing is incredibly
important we have antibody tests in the
field at the moment they're being used
for surveys they are lab based rather
than the rather than the automatic
response tests that we looked into in
great detail a month or so ago
then none of them were effective enough
to be used for clinical reasons but they
can still be used for surveys so we have
surveys in the field both with the the
stick tests and also with lab based
serology which detects antibodies so we
will be getting estimates soon of the
proportion of the population who have
the antibodies and the test tests for
whether the antibodies are there the
effect of the antibodies on your risk to
catching or transmitting corona virus in
the future is is the is the next
important step in that and the science
on that has been rapidly developing and
I'll ask jvt to update on that yes thank
you for the question so on antibodies
one of the things we want to know is
when you've had in Kovac 19 infection do
you get antibodies do they protect you
against further instances of the same
illness and how long are they going to
protect you for so that's kind of three
questions really
so let's chop this up into three answers
and the first answer is the first thing
we wanted to know was once you've had
confirmed kovat 19 infection do you get
antibodies and one of the things that
we've been interested in and want to do
is call people back who've had a Ovid 19
for sure and who've recovered to ask
them if they'll begin to take part in a
program we're starting to get plasma
containing antibodies and use it for
treatment in the future in trials to
understand if it's going to work and
save lives and the good news on that is
that that program has started and the
overwhelming majority of people so far
called back who've had definite Kove in
19 infection have got antibodies in
their blood stream which is a good news
the
so those antibodies take different times
in different people to develop but by
and large the signal is that people get
antibodies the next question is do those
antibodies protect you from further
infections and we just haven't had this
disease around on the planet in humans
for long enough to know the answers to
that with any surety and that's a piece
of science that we will just have to
follow a bit longer I hope the answer is
yes but I think it's one where we have
to be much clearer before we can take
that responsibility of giving you a very
clear answer on that and then the final
piece is how long will the antibodies
last and we do know that for other
normal coronaviruses if that's the right
word the ones that are a couple of
viruses that together with many others
cause what we call the common cold that
those antibodies don't persist
necessarily for years and years and
years now it doesn't follow that that's
going to be the case with kovat 19 we do
not know at this point we will have to
simply follow people who've recovered
and test them repeatedly until we have
an understanding of how long antibodies
last and how long they protect for but
there is an absolutely massive piece of
work now underway multiple studies to
look for antibodies in different
populations in the UK and indeed to
follow some people who've recovered for
long periods of time into the future at
least a couple of years and we will have
much clearer signals over time but I'm
afraid it's just one of those where we
can't make the science go any faster
than how quickly our bodies go in terms
of maintaining the antibodies and like
everybody else in the world we just have
to be patient and cautious until we get
those answers but I do believe in the
long run once we have those
kind of answers potentially antibody
testing will be a very important part of
our future strategy Thanks in fact I'm
in one of those trials so because I was
tested positive and now I have the I
have fairly regularly somebody comes and
takes blood to ensure that to test
whether I have antibodies and then also
to test whether I get it again because
we have surveys in the field right now
to test if people with antibodies then
catch the disease which is an absolutely
critical fact that will then determine
policy over what we say people with
antibodies who tested positive on an
antibody test can do and which is at the
moment we don't yet have the science to
make those policy decisions but it'll be
absolutely critical John did you have
anything to add on that's just just
briefly on the testing there's been
really very good progress on the
antibody test there are at least two
large commercial organizations who
develop good lab based antibody tests
which we're currently evaluating but
also people looking at ways in of doing
antibody tests close to the person the
patient and there are a number of
options there including a saliva test
and all of these options are looking
quite promising and being evaluated so I
think in general we can say as we did as
we thought that there would be antibody
tests available when we needed them and
they will support also our contact
tracing program and strategy later on
fantastic if I follow up if I may
actually state and thank you all three
for very informative answers there so to
state life's full of risks and this is
all about balance of risks you're
somebody who's probably got antibodies
would you feel happy going into a
crowded room not yet not yet I very much
hope that the science shows that the
people with antibodies who tested
positive for having antibodies are have
a low risk of transmitting the disease
and a low risk of catching it both are
important because low risk of catching
it to protect me low risk of
transmitting it to protect others
I much hope that that's where the
science comes out that is true of most
corona viruses
but we've got to make sure that we've
got the science because until we know
that's the case we can't be sure of it
we can't base a policy decision on it
and I can't be comfortable doing what
you mentioned in the question because
that might simply trigger a rise in the
number of infections if the science
turns out to be wrong and there are so
many novel things about this coronavirus
the there are so many things that are
different to previous there's the six
existing coronaviruses that we do have
to test this and not base our
assumptions on how other coronaviruses
behave because you you know i we don't
want to take the risk of assuming this
corona virus behaves like other corona
viruses before saying and taking a
policy decision that people with
antibodies are our lower risk but if the
science concludes that they that they
are then will take decisions on on that
basis and i would say this this point of
John's that there's been big advances in
antibody testing especially the lab
based antibody testing is very it's very
important today rush the Swiss global
Diagnostics company made a very positive
announcement about progress with their
antibody tests and we're in discussions
with them about a very large-scale
rollout of antibody testing as well as
with some others who may be able to
bring this forward but there's been
false hope before in antibody testing
and so I will will make announcements
when we're absolutely ready thanks very
much Joe Paul wore from the huffington
post el secretary as you frequently said
the long-term solution to this pandemic
is a fully scaled up vaccine for Kovan
19 yeah but a vaccine relies on as many
people as possible actually taking it up
now you told HuffPost last year and I
quote there's a very strong argument for
having compulsory vaccinations for
children for when they go to school
because otherwise they're putting other
children at risk would that apply to a
covert vaccine as well as to MMR
the vaccines and what other measures
you're looking at to ensure as many
adults and children take up the new
vaccine when it's available and if I can
to Professor van Tam can I ask you what
you've made of the early academic
research done in Harvard Germany and
even Cambridge that suggests high levels
of air pollution may be one of the most
important contributors to the clustering
of deaths from kovat 19 is saige looking
at that or going to look at that thanks
Paul two very good questions on the
vaccine and the first and most important
thing is that we support the development
of the vaccine and you all have seen the
Prime Minister's excellent announcement
today and then that we also ensure do
the work to ensure that people can get
access to the vaccines starting with
those who are most vulnerable and the on
the question of whether to make it
compulsory I think that the extent of
the public's reaction to following the
lockdown shows that we will be able to
achieve very very high levels of
vaccination without taking that step and
and so our task is to ensure that it is
in the first instance that we support
the science as much as possible
because we can't assume there'll be a
vaccine there is no coronavirus vaccine
yet and for any of the existing
coronaviruses and this is uncertain
science but whilst I don't rule anything
out i we're presuming we're proceeding
on the basis that just such a huge
proportion of the population are going
to take this up because of the obvious
benefits to individuals and their
families and their communities and
indeed the whole nation that there'll be
an enormous demand for it as and when
the science is safe to proceed Thank You
secretary so just to stay on the vaccine
question for a little longer and we are
following the developments in vaccine
research across the world including in
the UK we remain very hopeful that there
will be a breakthrough at some point in
the future I think what I can say
to you is that it is more likely than
not that the first vaccines will be
licensed in adults in the first instance
and therefore one has to take put some
caveats around your question around
children and the other thing to say is
that so far the epidemiological evidence
is not showing us that there is a
massive burden of disease or burden of
mortality in children it is actually
completely at the other end of the scale
it is in the elderly and so from that
perspective again that's another caveat
I'd add to your question about
vaccinating children on the second
question about air pollution and thank
you for that I think we already have
very solid data that air pollution
contributes to a whole range of
mortality particularly from respiratory
illnesses and respiratory diseases and
cardiovascular disease I have heard it
said about air pollution and kovat 19 I
have not personally studied those data
and looked at that question in detail
but what you say is entirely plausible
in my view and professor Newton may have
some further observations on air
pollution well they're only your general
point that we know that air pollution
because it's so pervasive and affects so
many people has a huge burden but like
Jonathan I haven't looked at those
papers but but I think is something that
we right the scientists we'll get back
to you yeah they're just one brief
follow-up sector of state do you have a
message for those anti-vaxxers here and
abroad
when we when and if we do get a vaccine
took over 19 I think there has been no
greater demonstration in modern history
that vaccines save lives than the need
for a vaccine to save lives and to get
the world going again following the
outbreak of kovat 19 and we will only
license a vaccine when it is both
effective and safe
and when the independent regulators if
and when the independent regulators
license a vaccine in this country they
will do so knowing that it were that it
is safe and everybody should follow that
everybody should follow that advice
thanks very much
so finally we're going to go to Louise
Hill from the Isle of Wight County Press
Thank You mr. secretary and as local
democracy reporter on the Isle of Wight
I have seen a mixed reaction to the app
but a main concern that keeps occurring
is whether you can ensure Island
residents who were wary of using the app
when this technology that their data
will be kept fully protected and private
throughout this trial and going forward
and the government will be fully
transparent with Islanders about the way
this app works yes absolutely this is an
incredibly important question I was very
glad to hear from Oliver from arlov
white radio that on his initial survey
there was a very high degree of support
for the for the app and for downloading
it but it has been the app has been
designed with privacy and security front
of mind it's been signed off by the
national cybersecurity Center who've
been involved in its development and I
want to thank them and pay tribute to
the work that they've done in ensuring
that the privacy and cybersecurity is
strong the data is stored on an
individual's phone not by the by the NHS
until somebody finds that they've got
symptoms and then they need a test and
so they need to connect to the NHS and
then you need to the NHS needs to
contact those who you've been in contact
with and so the the this has this has
the highest level of privacy built in to
make sure that we can both reassure
people in terms of privacy but also that
it can be effective and save lives I
don't know if you've got everything
exactly right so just to be absolutely
clear the app itself doesn't hold any
personal information
just as information about the phone
where it was which other phones it's
been in contact with but only using
anonymized randomly generated numbers
and those are the data that are collated
so no personal information is general is
that is contained by the app or
generated by their the circus-like the
only personal information used is when
somebody approaches the nhts to have a
test or to have their contact race so it
is a it's a very safe use of data and
people really should feel very reassured
by all the proportions that have been
taken thanks very much indeed thank you
from the island have you got a follow-up
you've got it so as you said earlier
we're told to look down won't be eased
on the island as part of the roller
rollout of this app does that that means
people already either at home or making
very limited trips and as the app is
predominantly aimed at the island skis
workers will that guarantee enough
useful data for the app going forward
this is a really important question that
we thought about when selecting where to
to trial it and because there's a busy
hospital on the island and there's other
and key workers including those who work
for the council for instance and in the
other services and the right across the
board there are there are interactions
and there are new cases on the island
and so we think that that it will be
effective and it would be an effective
place to pilot but also but we think
that the that the test track and trace
system as a whole will be more effective
when there are fewer new cases because
then when you do find a new case we can
really support that person find out who
they've been in contact with and then
contact all of those people and it's
quite a metallo of effort and support in
to then trying to stop that case from
spreading any further so actually the
the the test track and trade system as a
whole will be more effective when
there's fewer cases and currently there
are fewer cases on the island
than there are in the rest of the
country thank you very much indeed
there we are that see the headlines as
they happen and watch BBC news live in
the app and get the full story with BBC
decoder UK forward slash news follow the
story for all the latest with BBC News